Monkey tutorial (#4175)
guardicore/monkey: docs/content/tutorials/hello-monkey.md

---
title: "Tutorial 1: Hello Monkey"
date: 2020-05-26T20:57:10+03:00
draft: false
pre: '<i class="fab fa-graduation-cap"></i> '
weight: 2
tags: ["tutorials", "hello-monkey"]
---

## Hello Monkey

> In this tutorial, we will use the Infection Monkey to exploit a simple vulnerability. We will configure Infection Monkey to exploit the vulnerability, and then run the Monkey to observe that it is able to gain access to the machine. You'll learn how to start Infection Monkey, configure it, and run the Monkey against a network. Specifically, you'll learn how to:

Reviewer: Let's be more respectful: "Hello, fellow primate!"

> In this tutorial, we will use the Infection Monkey to exploit a simple vulnerability. We will configure Infection Monkey to exploit the vulnerability, and then run the Monkey to observe that it is able to gain access to the machine. You'll learn how to start Infection Monkey, configure it, and run the Monkey against a network. Specifically, you'll learn how to:

Author: Lol -- well it's the name I gave to this tutorial. Since it's redundant with the title that Hugo adds to the page, maybe I should just remove it

> In this tutorial, we will use the Infection Monkey to exploit a simple vulnerability. We will configure Infection Monkey to exploit the vulnerability, and then run the Monkey to observe that it is able to gain access to the machine. You'll learn how to start Infection Monkey, configure it, and run the Monkey against a network. Specifically, you'll learn how to:

Reviewer 2: It should be "Hello, Monkey" (if we keep it).

- Install plugins
- Specify targets for Infection Monkey to exploit in the network
- Tell Infection Monkey what exploits to attempt against machines on the network
- Provide Infection Monkey with credentials it can use when attempting to exploit machines
- Run the Monkey and observe its progress

### Prerequisites
First, make sure that you have the following prerequisites installed:
- `docker` and `docker-compose`

### Run the environment
Next, we'll use docker compose to run Infection Monkey along with our vulnerable container.

Run `docker compose up` to start the environment

{{% notice note %}}
The current docker compose script uses the host network.
{{% /notice %}}

Now that the environment is running, open a browser to `https://localhost:5000` to access the Monkey Island web interface. You will be presented with a registration page if you haven't registered. Provide a username and password to log in.

TODO: Screenshot of monkey login screen

### Configure the Monkey

> Now we'll need to configure Infection Monkey to exploit the vulnerable container. Select "Configure Monkey" on the "Getting Started" page (or select _Configuration_ in the navigation sidebar).
> 
> Before the Monkey can do anything useful, it needs to be configured. Otherwise, it won't know what exploits to attempt, or what machine(s) to attempt to breach.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before the Monkey can do anything useful, it needs to be configured. Otherwise, it won't know which exploits to attempt, or which machine(s) to attempt to breach.

We'll need to configure Infection Monkey to exploit the vulnerable container. Select "Configure Monkey" on the "Getting Started" page (or select _Configuration_ in the navigation sidebar).

```

{{% notice note %}}

> The Infection Monkey will only attempt to breach the machines that you've explicitly configured it to target. This helps to ensure that the Monkey doesn't run amok on your network.

Reviewer: What is "amok"?

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://github.com/guardicore/monkey/assets/19957806/75dce9ee-b44a-42a6-8c57-3dfdd11411db)
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/amok

> The Infection Monkey will only attempt to breach the machines that you've explicitly configured it to target. This helps to ensure that the Monkey doesn't run amok on your network.

Reviewer: we probably don't need this note. It should be properly explained in the config description. If such a basic/fundamental concept needs a note then we're doing something wrong

Reviewer: Either way, it's better to explain this in "What happened" section rather than trying to pre-emptively jump to the results

Reviewer 2: > If such a basic/fundamental concept needs a note then we're doing something wrong

The target audience is someone who's not at all familiar with infection Monkey. I think this note is worthwhile.

Reviewer: I really don't understand the reason for this note when the next section is called "Tell the Monkey which machines to target"

{{% /notice %}}

> #### Tell the Monkey what machines to target

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Tell the Monkey which machines to target
```

> In our case, we know that the target machine has the hostname `hello`. In order to tell the Monkey to target that hostname, starting from the **Configuration** page, ensure that **Propagation** tab is selected, and then select the **Network analysis** subtab. Then, under the "Scan target list" section, click the "+" button to add a target to scan. Enter our target hostname, `hello`, into the input field. Finally, make sure to scroll to the bottom and click **Submit** in order to save the configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In our case, we know that the target machine has the hostname `hello`. In order to tell the Monkey to target that hostname, starting from the **Configuration** page, ensure that the **Propagation** tab is selected, and then select the **Network analysis** subtab. Then, under the "Scan target list" section, click the "+" button to add a target to scan. Enter our target hostname, `hello`, into the input field. Finally, make sure to scroll to the bottom and click **Submit** in order to save the configuration.
```

TODO: Screenshots of configuration page(s)

{{% notice note %}}
You should see a notice indicating that the configuration was submitted successfully.

> {{% /notice %}}

Reviewer 3: I don't think this needs to be a separate note. We can just add it to the paragraph above.

> Great, the Monkey knows what machine to target. What happens if we run it? Select **1. Run Monkey** in the navigation sidebar to bring up the Run Monkey page. We'll choose the **From Island** option, which will start the Monkey from the Island machine. Go ahead and do that now.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Great, the Monkey now knows which machine to target. What happens if we run it? Select **1. Run Monkey** in the navigation sidebar to bring up the Run Monkey page. We'll choose the **From Island** option, which will start the attack simulation from the Island machine. Go ahead and do that now.
```

Observe that a checkmark appears next to **1. Run Monkey** in the navigation sidebar. This indicates that the Monkey agent has started.

> Select **2. Infection Map** in the navigation sidebar. This brings up a network view (from the Monkey's perspective). You should notice and arrow appear between the `monkey-island` machine and the vulnerable container. If you look at the legend, you'll notice that this is indicates that the Monkey scanned the container.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also see the Monkey's progress by selecting **2. Infection Map** in the navigation sidebar. This brings up a network view (from the Monkey's perspective). You should see an arrow appear between the `monkey-island` machine and the vulnerable container. If you look at the legend, you'll notice that this indicates that the Monkey scanned the container.
```

You should also observe a checkmark appear next to both **2. Infection Map** and **3. Security Reports** in the navigation sidebar. This indicates that the assessment has completed. Also note that while the Monkey was able to scan the container, it was not able to exploit it. In fact, if you select the vulnerable container in the **Infection Map** view, you'll see that it _hasn't even attempted_ to exploit it. This is because we haven't configured the Monkey with any exploiters. We'll do that next.

> #### Tell the Monkey what exploiters to use

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Tell the Monkey which exploiters to use
```

- Install plugins
- Specify targets for Infection Monkey to exploit in the network
- Tell Infection Monkey what exploits to attempt against machines on the network
- Provide Infection Monkey with credentials that it can use when attempting to exploit machines
- Run the Monkey and observe its progress

### Prerequisites
First, make sure that you have the following installed:
- `docker` and `docker-compose`

### Run the environment
Next, we'll use docker compose to run Infection Monkey along with our vulnerable container.

Run `docker compose up` to start the environment.

{{% notice note %}}
The current docker compose script uses the host network.
{{% /notice %}}

Now that the environment is running, open a browser to `https://localhost:5000` to access the Monkey Island web interface. You will be presented with a registration page if you haven't registered. Provide a username and password to log in.

> ![Infection Monkey login screen](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/1-registration-page.jpg)
> ![Getting started page](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/2-getting-started-page.jpg)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Infection Monkey login screen](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/1-registration-page.jpg)

After registering, you'll be automatically logged in. You'll be brought to the welcome screen, which looks like this:

![Getting started page](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/2-getting-started-page.jpg)
```

![Network analysis configuration](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/4-network-analysis.jpg)

Then, under the "Scan target list" section, click the "+" button to add a target to scan. Enter our target hostname, `hello`, into the input field.

![Scan target list in the Network Analysis configuration](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/5-scan-target-list.jpg)

Finally, make sure to scroll to the bottom and click **Submit** in order to save the configuration.

![Submit button](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/6-submit-button.jpg)

{{% notice note %}}
You should see a notice indicating that the configuration was submitted successfully.
{{% /notice %}}

Great, the Monkey knows what machine to target. What happens if we run it? Select **1. Run Monkey** in the navigation sidebar to bring up the Run Monkey page. We'll choose the **From Island** option, which will start the Monkey from the Island machine. Go ahead and do that now.

![Run Monkey page](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/7-run-monkey.jpg)

Observe that a checkmark appears next to **1. Run Monkey** in the navigation sidebar. This indicates that a Monkey Agent has started.

> You can also see the Monkey's progress by selecting **2. Infection Map** in the navigation sidebar. This brings up a network view (from the Monkey's perspective). You should see an arrow appear between the `monkey-island` machine and the vulnerable container. If you look at the legend, you'll notice that this indicates that the Monkey scanned the container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can see the Monkey's progress by selecting **2. Infection Map** in the navigation sidebar. This brings up a network view (from the Monkey's perspective). You should see an arrow appear between the `monkey-island` machine and the vulnerable container. If you look at the legend, you'll notice that this indicates that the Monkey scanned the container.
```

![Network map](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/8-map-scanned.jpg)

You should also observe a checkmark appear next to both **2. Infection Map** and **3. Security Reports** in the navigation sidebar. This indicates that the assessment has completed. Also note that while the Monkey was able to scan the container, it was not able to exploit it. In fact, if you select the vulnerable container in the **Infection Map** view, you'll see that it _hasn't even attempted_ to exploit it. This is because we haven't configured the Monkey with any exploiters. We'll do that next.

![Exploit timeline](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/9-exploit-timeline.jpg)

#### Tell the Monkey which exploiters to use

> Now we're going to configure the Monkey to use an exploiter. In order to do that, select **Configuration** in the navigation sidebar. Select the **Propagation** tab, and the **Exploiters** subtab. You should see a list of _Enabled exploiters_, which you'll notice, is empty. This is because we haven't installed any exploiters yet. Thankfully, the _Enabled exploiters_ list provides a link to a page where we can download exploiters, so let's follow that link and install an exploiter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we're going to configure the Monkey to use an exploiter. In order to do that, select **Configuration** in the navigation sidebar. Select the **Propagation** tab, and the **Exploiters** subtab. You should see a list of _Enabled exploiters_ which, you'll notice, is empty. This is because we haven't installed any exploiters yet. Thankfully, the _Enabled exploiters_ list provides a link to a page where we can download exploiters, so let's follow that link and install an exploiter.
```

> Now we're going to configure the Monkey to use an exploiter. In order to do that, select **Configuration** in the navigation sidebar. Select the **Propagation** tab, and the **Exploiters** subtab. You should see a list of _Enabled exploiters_, which you'll notice, is empty. This is because we haven't installed any exploiters yet. Thankfully, the _Enabled exploiters_ list provides a link to a page where we can download exploiters, so let's follow that link and install an exploiter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we're going to configure the Monkey to use an exploiter. In order to do that, select **Configuration** in the navigation sidebar. Select the **Propagation** tab, and the **Exploiters** subtab. You should see a list of _Enabled exploiters_, which you'll notice, is empty. This is because we haven't installed any exploiters yet. Thankfully, the _Enabled exploiters_ list provides a link to a page where we can download and install exploiter plugins, so let's follow that link and install an exploiter.
```

![Filtered plugin list](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/11-filtered-plugin-list.jpg)

Great! We've installed the SSH Exploiter, but we still need to tell the Monkey to use it. Navigate back to the **Configuration** page, and notice that the _Enabled exploiters_ list now shows _SSH Exploiter_ as an option. Check the box next to _SSH Exploiter_, leave the default option values unchanged, and then **Submit** the configuration.

![Enable the SSH Exploiter](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/12-exploiter-enabled.jpg)

Now that we've told Infection Monkey which exploiter to use, let's try running again. Go navigate to **1. Run Monkey** and select _From Island_ again. Then, let's have another look at the _Infection Map_:

![Network map](../../images/tutorials/hello-monkey/8-map-scanned.jpg)

Hmm. No change. It _still_ didn't attempt to exploit.

This is because the SSH Exploiter requires credentials in order to run, and we haven't provided any. Let's do that now.

#### Tell the Monkey which credentials to use
Navigate once again to the **Configuration** page. Select the **Propagation** tab, then the **Credentials** subtab.

> Enter `user` into the **Identity** field, and `j688yq/pB{5=` in the **Password** field, and hit the _Save_ button.

Reviewer 2: Is there any reason not to use a simpler, more human-readable password?

Author: I suppose not
